Click the link below to see the final paper written implementing the data obtained from the algorithms in the code repository
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SDFKh5MtLDzJm5JXsxCuZiiCGT1slpt-nA85bixuWpU/edit?usp=sharing

2020-2021 MODELING THE FUTURE CHALLENGE PROJECT REPORT

**An Analysis on The Impact of Overcast Weather on Fatal Accident Frequency**

Miscalculation (7279)

**Contents**

**1 Executive Summary** ………..……………………………………………….………..………..**2**

**2 Introduction** ……………………..…………………….……………………………………….**3**

2.1 Background Information ……………………………………………………………...3

2.1.1 History of Accidents in Seattle and San Francisco………………………….3

2.1.2 Public Transportation Implementation………………...…………………....4

**3 Modeling**....………………………………………………….………………………………….**5**

3.1 Data Methodology…………………………………………………………………….5

3.1.1 NHTSA FIRST (Primary Data Set
1).............................................................5

3.1.2 NHTSA FARS (Primary Data Set
2)..............................................................5

3.1.3 CDC Transportation Fact Sheets (Primary Data Set
3)..................................6

3.1.4 National Safety Council Injury Facts (Supporting Data Set
1)......................6

3.1.5 Columbia University Electric Bus Analysis (Supporting Data Set
2)...........6

3.2 Mathematics Methodology……………………………………………………………7

3.2.1 Assumptions and Justifications…….……………………………………….7

3.2.2 Model Overview…………………………………..………………………...8

3.2.3 Automobile Damage Cost Calculation
(1)....................................................10

3.2.4: Future Accident Calculation
(2)..................................................................11

3.2.5: Model of Cost Over Time
(3)......................................................................11

3.2.6: Public Transportation Cost Calculation
(4).................................................12

3.3 Combined Results………………………………………………………………...….12

**4 Analysis** ……………………………..……………………….…………………………..…... **16**

4.1 Risk Analysis……………………………………………………………………..….16

4.2 Recommendations……………………………………………………………………17

4.2.1 Insurance Recommendations……………………………………………....17

4.2.2 Behavior Recommendations……………………………………………….19

4.2.3 Modifying Outcomes……………………………………………………....19

**5 Appendix** ………………....……………..…………………….……………………...……… **20**

5.1 Supplementary Information………………………………………………………….20

5.2 Technical Computing………………………………………………………………...22

5.3 References……………………………………………………………………………22

**1 Executive Summary**

It is a well-established notion that rainy and overcast weather are two of the
top contributors to the occurrence of automobile accidents. In this report, we
focused our analysis on the impact of poor weather conditions on fatal accident
frequency. For the sake of simplicity, we restricted our initial analysis to two
cities (Seattle, Washington and San Francisco, California). We drew direct
comparisons between accidents in rainy/overcast and clear weather, conducting
analysis through visual representations to better assess their relationships and
eventually explore preventative measures.

Referring to data regarding regional weather patterns and historical
indemnities, we evaluated the cost-efficiency of implementing public
transportation to decrease the number of accidents, determining whether cities
would be saving lives and financial resources from reduced costs of car
insurance claims. Sources such as the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA)’s Fatality and Injury Reporting System Tool (FIRST) and
Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) encyclopedia tables allowed us to
determine the quantity and severity of accidents in Seattle that occurred due to
wet roads or low visibility caused by heavy rainfall compared to that of San
Francisco.

In this project, we will be modeling the predicted number of accidents as a
result of wet roads and lower visibility due to rain. We will then combine this
with a predictive representation of automobile costs in order to synthesize a
model showing the estimated costs over time. With this model, we hope to
determine the feasibility of increasing public transportation as a means to
decrease the costs of automobile damage and thus decrease auto insurance costs
as a whole. This would be done by running start-up static cost calculations and
determining the average cost of maintenance per year for a 5-year period and
cross-referencing the two models. Furthermore, we will use our models to
determine whether the cost of insurance claims will increase, decrease, or
remain stagnant in future years.

Through the utilization of our algorithm, we determined that in San Francisco it
would take an estimated 30 years for the cost of the electric busing system to
become a cheaper alternative to the current trend of fatalities occurring during
rainy/overcast weather. For Seattle, it takes about double the time. Based on
our analysis, we outlined insurance, behavior, and modified outcome
recommendations to automobile insurance companies and drivers. We suggest that
insurance companies consider increasing policy rates so that they may mitigate
incurred losses. However, with a properly implemented electric busing system, we
would expect a decrease in policy rates, which our model suggests would be
another viable alternative for certain locations. Over time, decreasing the
traffic fatality rate has proven to be extremely difficult, but we believe our
models and suggestions can help make our roadways safer for everyone.

**2 Introduction**

**2.1 Background Information  
2.1.1 History of Accidents in Seattle and San Francisco:**

In the United States, it has been shown that there has been a continuous annual
decline in fatal traffic accidents [1]. From 2018 to 2019, there was a 2%
decrease in the number of fatalities despite an overall increase in the number
of miles driven by 1%. However, the fatality rate involving large trucks has
stayed relatively consistent. This implies that the vehicle innovations over
time are having a positive effect on the safety of motor vehicles, since larger
vehicles weighing over 10,000 pounds tend to receive fewer safety innovations,
thus indicating that these innovations are the main drivers in the reduction of
fatalities.

Seattle had set their sights on the Zero Vision goal in 2015, which is to
achieve zero fatalities by 2030 [2]. This would theoretically be done by
lowering speed limits and redesigning roadways. Lowering the speed limit in
Seattle would theoretically be a good way to achieve this goal since one of the
top causes of car accidents in the city is driving too fast for the road
conditions [3], as the maximum speed limit is often too fast for particular
conditions. In rainy weather with lower visibility, it is necessary to drive
slower than the speed limit, which a lot of people don’t do. However, in a
real-world application, the number of fatal accidents and serious accidents is
not decreasing at a fast enough rate to reach the goal, even though their
regulation changes should theoretically help [4]. San Francisco is somewhat
unique in the fact that slower average speeds and shorter travel distances
compensate for their high road density, which leads to a low fatality rate per
capita but a high fatality rate per mile driven [5].

![](media/7ba2bbc99e1afeefb7aff6a1140f5bab.png)

**Figure 1:** Bar graph showing the number of fatal accidents and injuries as a
result of automobile accidents in Seattle over time, having a generally
decreasing trend.

**2.1.2 Public Transportation Implementation:**

The exponential growth and development of local populations within metropolitan
areas has only increased the importance of public transportation. The dying
potential of horizontal development in modern cities has disincentivized the
ownership of private vehicles. Limited space has increased the economic costs of
parking, time costs of large-scale traffic, and safety costs associated with
accidents.

Buses are the most common form of public transit. Financed through state taxes,
buses use established routes, follow government regulations, and hire trained
drivers to ensure riders safely reach their destinations. Although private
automobiles outnumber buses by a ratio of 255:1 [6], they statistically account
for the same frequency of accidents. Holistically, the likelihood of a bus
accident occurring is roughly equal to that of cars and other private-owned
vehicles. There are 3.04 bus accidents per million passenger miles while there
are 3.21 car accidents per million driven miles [7]. By mileage, the dangers of
buses do not diverge strongly from other transportation. Although public
transportation accidents have the potential to be more severe than private
transportation, research shows that the accident fatality rate for buses is 45
deaths per 100,000 accidents, while the rate for private automobiles is 251 per
100,000 [8].

Additionally, we must consider the idea of moral hazard, as people tend to
become more impatient if others drive slower in poor weather conditions. The
same idea can be applied to the consideration of safety advancements as people
would tend to become more careless since they know the technology makes them
safer.

The costs of increasing public transportation implementation in the United
States must also be taken into consideration before reaching a conclusion on
whether the greater imposition of public transportation options is an
economically viable solution. For instance, although 84% of the buses used for
public transportation in the United States are diesel-powered, [9] over a
12-year period electric buses are more cost-efficient by about 1.4 million
dollars and each vehicle costs about \$850,000 [10]. It was also found that over
63,000 buses are involved in an accident every year [7] and the fees associated
with repairs and maintenance can accumulate rapidly. When coupling this with the
fact that an average of \$7.83 is spent on each passenger who will give back
only \$1.26 in fares, it can be seen that more widespread implementation of this
system will only lead to greater government losses and greater contributions in
taxes. The average claim for bodily injury was \$16,640 and in 2019, 4.4 million
people were injured in private automobile accidents [11]. Multiplying these
values together gives us a total expenditure of \$73.2 billion dollars for
bodily injury in 2019. Meanwhile, there were 65,000 buses in use in December of
2017, and assuming each bus was electric it would cost an average of \$850,000,
we get an upfront cost of \$50.5 billion. Adding maintenance fees (\$1.8
billion) and injury claims (\$233 million), we get \$57.3 billion expended for
implementing this system in the first year.

**3 Modeling**

**3.1 Data Methodology**

Our modeling data originates from two primary sources: The National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration’s Fatality and Injury Reporting System Tool
(NHTSA) and the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) encyclopedia tables.

The data extracted from these references help us discern changes in the fatal
accident rates of Seattle and San Francisco independently whilst filtering
specific weather conditions, enabling us to draw statistical connections and
generate inferences.

We use the NHTSA website extensively throughout the paper since they are a
government organization that partners with both state and local governments, and
as a result, they have access to the accident statistics that we need in order
to assess the economic losses that would be accrued from potential accidents.

**3.1.1 NHTSA FIRST (Primary Data Set 1):**

-   **Limitations of Data:** This data source compiles information from sources
    such as the General Estimates System (GES) and Crash Report Sampling System
    (CRSS). In order for an accident to enter the GES or CRSS sampling pool, an
    accident report that conclusively involved death, injury, or property damage
    must be filed through the police or other legal authorities. This is
    adequate as inferential data in developing statistical models involving
    fatal accidents.

-   **Applications and Purpose of Data:** This data is extremely useful in
    determining an estimate for the number of people injured in motor
    vehicle-related crashes and will allow us to make inferences about the
    relative effectiveness of current risk mitigation strategies.

**3.1.2 NHTSA FARS (Primary Data Set 2):**

-   **Limitations of Data:** The FARS is a collection of data of the fatal
    traffic crashes on public roads within the United States that result in the
    passing of a vehicle occupant or nonoccupant within a month after the
    accident. The data is only sourced from each state’s existing documents,
    which include police accident reports, highway department data, death
    certificates, and state driver licensing files. This source aligns with our
    needs since our model focuses on fatal accidents.

-   **Applications and Purpose of Data:** This source proved to be extremely
    convenient in differentiating between non-fatal accidents and fatal
    accidents that actually resulted in the death of a vehicle occupant or
    nonoccupant. Filtering the data based on the severity of the accident allows
    us to make more accurate risk mitigation suggestions and conclusions.

**3.1.3 CDC Transportation Fact Sheets (Primary Data Set 3)**

-   **Limitations of Data:** The data set only provides information for
    State-Specific Costs of Motor Vehicle Crash Deaths from the year 2018,
    however the data would prove to be more accurate for our model if we were
    able to obtain an average across a longer time frame of several years.

-   **Applications and Purpose of Data:** This source provides data regarding
    automobile crash deaths with categorizations into demographics of age and
    transportation variety. Also, each of these individualized reports contains
    targeted policies to counteract large scale accidents. This will be vital as
    we explore preventative measures and generate Gaussian Randoms.

**3.1.4 National Safety Council Injury Facts (Supporting Data Set 1)**

-   **Limitations of Data:** The National Safety Council only provides accident
    facts from an 8-year period (2010-2018) only making it applicable to a
    small-time frame without excessive risks from extrapolation. Additionally,
    the data does not categorize deaths from Washington D.C. into respective
    states, so they are held separately. This means that according to this
    source, there are 51 U.S. states which may bring difficulties with
    calculation and application with other sources only using 50.

-   **Applications and Purpose of Data:** The data gathered from the NSC
    provides aggregates of automobile deaths that occur within states and by
    other measures. Using this in tandem with information from the CDC, we can
    generate a value to represent the average costs of automobile death per
    state.

**3.1.5 Columbia University Electric Bus Analysis (Supporting Data Set 2)**

-   **Limitations of Data:** The source only provides static numbers on the cost
    of purchase, maintenance, and electricity/fuel over a 12-year period, with
    no real evidence as to what these costs would look like in other areas. It
    is possible that these costs vary between states, but this study was
    conducted in New York.

-   **Applications and Purpose of Data:** We used their values for their
    purchase price, maintenance cost, and electricity cost for an electric bus
    to run our static cost calculations.

We determined that San Francisco adequately represented the average US state in
terms of weather conditions and had a minimal enough population difference to
justify comparison (753,000 in Seattle; 881,000 in San Francisco). We determine
the average weather conditions for this study to be a city that is near the
national average of 59 rainy days per year, and San Francisco’s average is 72
rainy per year, which is not very far off, especially when compared to Seattle’s
152 rainy days per year.

**3.2 Mathematics Methodology**

**3.2.1 Assumptions and Justifications:**

1.  *The data from 2020-2021 are anomalies and from 2022 onwards the trends will
    remain constant, continuing from where they left off in 2019.* Due to the
    pandemic, these two years have very little correlation with the normal
    trends in prior years in areas such as a lower average claim cost (which has
    fallen for the first time in a decade) [12], greater prevalence of moral
    hazards [13], and an abnormal increase in the traffic fatality rate.

2.  *The values used for the cost calculations will remain the same in 2022 as
    they were in 2019.* There’s no specific data indicating different costs once
    we return to pre-COVID patterns. In order to keep the model as accurate as
    possible, we will be using the values that are available to us.

3.  *Fatal accidents are the most relevant type of accident.* This is due to the
    fact that on average an accident with fatalities will cost \$1,410,000 per
    death while accidents involving non-disabling, non-fatal injuries cost
    \$8,900 [14].

4.  *Taking into account the economic impact of* [*motor vehicle
    accidents*](https://www.tavss.com/library/5-hot-tips-for-auto-accident-injury-victims.cfm)
    *will be sufficient to determine the true costs of the accident.* If we were
    to attempt to calculate the Average comprehensive cost of motor vehicle
    crashes per injured person*,* then we would have to determine the value of
    the loss of human life, which is not what we are attempting to determine.

5.  *Buses are purchased over a 3-5 year period and their maintenance costs stay
    consistent over a 5-year period.* It would be extremely difficult to try and
    predict how the costs of electric buses and maintenance will change over
    time, so we would use the values provided by a Columbia 2016 study [10].

6.  *A successful implementation of a public bus system would mean increasing
    the current fleet by 50%.* Adding anything less than this would likely lead
    to minimal change. This would mean adding 410 electric buses to San
    Francisco [15] and 935 buses to Seattle [16] [17].

7.  *All of the people who are included in our simulations have auto insurance*.
    The majority of individuals who drive have auto insurance, and there is not
    enough substantial data to draw an accurate model of people who are
    currently uninsured.

8.  *If a fatal accident involves a single collision, then we assume that on
    average one person died, if a fatal accident occurs from a traffic
    collision, then we can assume two people died on average.* Since we know
    that about 60% of fatal accidents involve one vehicle, and 40% involve
    multiple vehicles [18], to get a conservative estimate, we assume these
    values.

**3.2.2 Model Overview**

Our model’s primary goal is to determine the economic feasibility of
implementing a public transportation system using buses given cost data accrued
from automobile damage over time. The detailed workflow of our methodology can
be seen below, with numerically labeled steps:

**![](media/baeb334c7705370249d714ec4b2c21aa.png)**

**Figure 2:** Modeling methodology to forecast the economic feasibility of a
public transportation system over the next ten years.

We began by compartmentalizing our extracted data into three separate processes
based on our previously stated research priorities. The first process accounted
for the automobile damage cost calculation (1). Its operation solely involves
fatal accident statistics given the larger expenses which comprise a greater
portion of total costs and this data is readily accessible [12].

Our second process, the future accident calculation (2), is closely linked with
the automobile damage costs (1) and they are used in tandem with one another to
generate a Monte Carlo synthesis model. To accomplish a model that could
realistically set expectations for future accidents in the next 5 years (2), we
created projections utilizing previously determined trends from the past decade.
Given the likelihood of large-scale technological developments in future
transportation, we determined that the risks associated with uncertainty spawned
from data extrapolation beyond this point would outweigh any predictive value.
With these two projections, we could simulate a representative measure of
automobile damage costs over a period of 5 years. However, performing one
instance of this synthetical process would only generate a single and
statistically limited outcome for the coming decade. In order to circumvent
this, we run multiple iterations(1,000,000) using the Monte Carlo method to
obtain a more accurate and better representative idea of what these numbers
would look like and generate the model of cost over time (3).

One of our risk mitigation attempts was to implement a form of public
transportation (primarily the use of electric buses) in order to see if it is
actually cost-effective. In order to determine this, we simply ran static cost
calculations (4) and made the y-intercept the initial start-up cost assuming
they implement the system now, and then slope of the line being the average
maintenance costs per year, and created static cost over time graph (5).

Now that we have steps (3) and (5) completed a cost comparison could be done by
simply overlaying the two graphs and determining what would be cheapest by the
end of the 5 years.

The purpose of the City class in our code is to allow us to create two distinct
city objects that can each store parameters such as their number of fatal
accidents per year and the cost of auto damage per year.

**3.2.3 Automobile Damage Cost Calculation (1)**

In order to calculate the financial damage incurred during a year in a
particular city from auto damage, we first needed an accurate value for the cost
of fatal accidents and determined that using a Gaussian would be relatively
effective in accomplishing this.

Gaussians in java require both the mean and standard deviation, which we
acquired through the following formulas:

σ (Population) = = 131,447.63

Statistically, the values of our data regarding the financial costs of
fatalities vary by \$131,447.63 from the mean value of \$1,472,637.93.

private double fatalAccidentCost = (avgAccidentCost.nextGaussian() \*

σ + x̄);

This provides us a randomly distributed value for the cost of one death in an
automobile accident. Next we would need to multiply this by the number of fatal
accidents that occurred for that particular year, which is stored in a private
array called int[] numAccidents. The values stored in the array indicate the
number of fatal accidents that occurred in a given year, while the indexes
represent the years 2005-2019, where index 0 is 2005 and index 14 is 2019.

In the method autoDamageCalculation(), we are able to use a for loop to combine
these two values at each index which allows for the approximation of the cost
from the fatal accidents into a new array autoCostPerYear. As previously
mentioned in *assumption 7*, we decided that assuming by that around 60% of
accidents only involve one vehicle, and the other 40% involve multiple, we could
reach a more accurate, yet conservative estimate for the costs accrued in a year
from fatal accidents. The algorithm used for this calculation is as follows:

this.autoCostPerYear[i] = (((this.numAccidents[i]\*.60)\*
this.fatalAccidentCost) +
(this.numAccidents[i]\*.40)\*2\*this.fatalAccidentCost);

**3.2.4: Future Accident Calculation (2)**

For this calculation we implemented a variety of random walks with our
non-linear regression. The goal was to try and predict the number of fatal
accidents that would occur in the next 5 years.

When initially determining the non-linear regression formula, we noticed that
although there was a clear trend in the upward direction, there was a high
amount of variability for both cities due to the fairly small numbers and
relatively low sample size. So, in addition to finding the predicted values
through our formula, we decided to predict the variability that we saw and
modify our values.

To do this, we found the average change between our data points (from 2005-2019)
as well as calculated the standard deviation. We then used a gaussian random to
generate a deviation from the model’s predicted values based on these numbers.

this.deviation = (avgDeviation.nextGaussian() \* 4.3785 + 0.8);

this.futureAccidentsPerYear[i] = estimateAccidents[i] + this.deviation;

**3.2.5: Model of Cost Over Time (3)**

In order to generate the model of cost over time, the Monte Carlo method must
first be used. This was implemented in an attempt to estimate the possible
outcomes of the random variables. The formula for Monte Carlo is the same as
that of the simple average previously mentioned. This must be implemented on all
of the aspects that contain random variables, in this case the future accident
calculation and the automobile damage cost calculation. In this case it would
be:

sanFrancisco.futureCostsPerYear[i]=sum/numRuns;

**3.2.6: Public Transportation Cost Calculation (4)**

Due to the simplicity of this calculation, we did not deem coding implementation
necessary. Since transit companies usually pay for buses up front[19], the
purchase cost is simply the y-intercept (b), and the two values provided for
maintenance cost and fuel cost[10] divided by 12 are the incremental costs per
year (Δy/Δx). If we multiply the entire equation by the number of buses (n),
then we can get a formula for the implementation cost of public transportation
over time (ŷ).

**3.3 Combined Results**

The first thing we graphed was our predictions for the number of runs to see how
realistic they seemed compared to the previous trends. Before we implemented our
gaussian-based random walk algorithm, we got these values for the next 5 years:

![](media/c2a962830736ab52f297377d812a0640.png)

**Figure 3**: This table shows the number of accidents in overcast/rainy weather
predicted over the next 5 years before random walk was implemented

These values increase at a much too linear rate for it to be accurate to the
volatility of the previous data. After we implemented our random walk
algorithms, these values started to look significantly more realistic.

![](media/a176de052831ee20cbdaa02a5a38b2ef.png)

**Figure 4**: This table shows the number of accidents in overcast/rainy weather
predicted over the next 5 years after random walk was implemented

If we were to try and extrapolate beyond 5 years then making accurate
predictions would be nearly impossible due to the volatility of the data.

![](media/e673d1459d0716da391d9afaca8348dd.png)

**Figure 5:** This graph shows the data provided from our sources (2005-2019) in
addition to our extrapolated data from our algorithm (2022-2026).

In order to determine the aggregate costs of implementing a bus system, we now
needed to plug in the values into our earlier ŷ equation. After substituting the
appropriate variables, it resulted in the two equations:

ŷ(San Francisco) =

ŷ(Seattle) =

At the end of 2026, it was determined that it would have cost an estimated
\$393.61 million for San Francisco to increase their bus fleet by 50% over 5
years.

![](media/339d967079853d08827e0cfda9c149c2.png)

**Figure 6:** This graph shows the estimated cost of implementing a bus system
in San Francisco that is 50% greater than the current fleet (these calculations
do not consider the maintenance/fuel costs of the current fleet)

The insurance cost calculations were done on a per year basis, so the data had
to be reformatted to show an aggregate cost growing over the period. Once
plotted, the aggregate cost equation most closely resembled the equation (where
x is the number of years after 2022) with an r2 of 0.983:

ŷ=14.935x + 21.83 (in millions)

Now we simply have to compare the bus cost prediction with the insurance cost
predictions to see how the costs over time compare. After running the algorithm
and graphing the results, we were able to create the comparison below.

![](media/9a9a1714e58c03f6dc7e33476fd81288.png)

**Figure 7:** This double line graph shows the aggregate costs over time of bus
implementation costs vs. auto damage costs in San Francisco

![](media/8a40e53ed5e82e0adc683fac60df2924.png)

**Figure 8:** This double line graph shows what the projected aggregate costs 10
years into the future will be if the trends their same path

If the trends were to continue, then the increasing values of the auto damage
costs would surpass those of the electric bus costs in 2052 (30 years after
2022)

For Seattle, the disparity between the two graphs was essentially doubled, since
the busing system there is more than twice as large, so to meet the 50%
threshold twice as much money would be needed while having a relatively similar
number of accident costs.

![](media/7de1777a1eff7cf5aacb638468e5b1dd.png)

**Figure 9:** This double line graph shows the aggregate costs over time of bus
implementation costs vs. auto damage costs in Seattle

**4 Analysis**

We evaluated our model predictions and anticipated trends to determine the
effects on other organizations and quantify the risk. Then, we formed
suggestions on how these risks can be combated through changes in insurance and
public policy.

**4.1 Risk Analysis**

Every year insurance rates have been climbing an average of 3-4%. If they were
to keep increasing at this rate in the future, then the consumer will have to
pay even more ridiculous rates to simply own a vehicle. The thing is, the
solution is not as simple as improving vehicle technology. While this does end
up reducing the consumer risk, it increases the cost of vehicle maintenance, so
if the vehicle does end up getting damaged, it would cost more to repair it,
thus costing insurance companies more money, leading to higher insurance rates
for the consumer [20].

2021 has been an anomaly in that auto insurance rates have fallen for the first
time in a decade (dropped by 1.7% in 2021) due to the pandemic [14]. Due to a
combination of fewer drivers on the road and reduced accident frequency, the
average cost of car insurance had dropped to \$1,636 in the U.S. from \$2,388 in
2020, which is a huge reduction. Although there was a massive decrease in
insurance cost, that doesn’t mean that the roads were much safer during 2020. In
fact, it turns out that more lives were lost in the first nine months of 2020
compared to the same time frame in 2019 despite there being significantly less
people on the road [15]. This is where moral hazard comes into play. The NHTSA
report found that the use of seat belts substantially decreased while speeding
and drug use while driving had increased. This means it is relevant to consider
strategies that would decrease the likelihood of fatal accidents even if certain
individuals tend to put themselves at greater risk.

**4.2 Recommendations**

**4.2.1 Insurance Recommendations**

Our recommendations to automobile insurance companies will revolve around the
results of our model for the expected losses associated with indemnities over
the upcoming 10 years until 2032, as seen below:

![](media/03980d15e2a08d6888e5caa2d56932f1.png)

**Figure 10:** The line graph models San Francisco’s expected decreasing number
of loss per year (in millions USD) associated with indemnities over the upcoming
10 years until 2032

The above chart models how much San Francisco would be losing (net) if their
busing network were increased by 50% and as a result their number of fatalities
from automobile accidents dropped to a low zero number. The reason the value is
decreasing each year is due to the fact that if the number of automobile
accidents were at the high rates they were without public transit’s
implementation, then roughly 20 million dollars a year would be lost, compared
to busing systems 11.25 million. It’s just that it has a high start-up cost so
it takes a longer time to make up that difference.

Based on our analysis, San Francisco would benefit the most from public
transportation since Seattle already has a sizable busing system in place yet
still has a comparable number of fatal automobile accidents. An expansion of a
similar scale to that of San Francisco would be too costly to warrant the
potential benefits.

Given the increase in expensive accidents due to natural disasters or human
errors, automobile insurance providers must re-evaluate their policies to adapt
to the increased risks. We recommend such providers to potentially raise
premiums in order to mitigate the losses they may incur, given that the amount
of incurred losses for automobile insurance in the United States has steadily
increased from \$145,152,404 in 2015 to \$184,669,308 in 2019 [20]. As seen
below in Figure 11, the 10 largest automobile insurance companies in the United
States have experienced similar issues, as they have posted an average annual
profit margin of -3.3% and annual rate increases of 4.4% from 2014 to 2018.

![](media/1ba0d8f90065927869f046b7facd8c2e.png)

**Figure 11:** The graph above highlights the correlation between the 10 largest
US automobile insurers’ average annual profit margin and rate increases

Climate change has played a massive role in the increasing number of losses, as
seen in the November 2018 California wildfires which caused over \$123 million
in auto and nonresidential insurance claims according to the California
Department of Insurance. Furthermore, the rapid technological advancements over
the past decade has provided users with multiple outlets that can be used as
distractions while driving. The NHTSA has reported an increase from 2.21 million
distracted driver injuries in 2011 to an astonishing 2.44 million distracted
driving injuries in 2015 [23]. The aforementioned issue is made even worse given
the increasing repair costs that are associated with the latest technological
advancements that are seen in new vehicles. Although the implementation of
safety features, such as a mandatory backup camera, can reduce the risk of
accidents, the cost of previously inexpensive repairs have risen which increases
the potential losses incurred by insurance companies.

Overall, automobile insurance companies should look towards increasing their
policy rates in order to mitigate the losses they are experiencing.
Additionally, as seen in our model, the widespread implementation of public
transportation such as buses in San Francisco would result in a decreasing trend
for experienced losses associated with indemnities; however, this may not be
applicable to all areas in the country as mentioned above.

**4.2.2 Behavior Recommendations**

In our behavioral recommendations, we will be focusing on how to mitigate the
risks that come with moral hazards. The subconscious feeling of safety that
arises from various spheres, such as better insurance policies and safer
automobile advancements, can lead to the development of an unrealistic sense of
safety which leads to people taking bigger risks than they usually would. In
terms of the effects of safety advancements, the NHTSA reported that seat belt
usage decreased from 75.4% to 59.2% and average speeds increased by 22% during
peak pandemic times [13]. These trends can be connected to the major decrease in
the number of drivers during this period, which can develop a facade that there
is less risk associated with driving recklessly. Moreover, within the automobile
insurance sector, people who know their insurers will protect them from their
losses will tend to take greater risks. In terms of insurance, risks that arise
from moral hazards can be mitigated by ensuring that the insured party bears a
portion of the cost of their risky behavior’s consequences. Essentially, there
must be something that the insured party must be at risk of losing in order to
incentivize safe behavior.

**4.2.3 Modifying Outcomes**

In order to successfully modify the outcomes, we need to prevent fatal accidents
from occurring in the first place. This can be done in several ways. One of
which includes decreasing the severity of the fatal accidents that do occur.
Sitting too close to airbags proves to be extremely dangerous. Although they
have saved thousands of lives, they can cause serious harm if a person were to
sit closer than 10 inches away from the steering wheel. Airbags expand at about
200mph with 2,000 pounds of force so it is of utmost importance that this
distance is maintained. Individuals who are shorter and thus have a harder time
reaching the pedals or seeing out the windshield tend to move the seat forward
to maximize their comfort. This contributes to the fact that women are 47% more
likely to be injured in a collision than men [24]. Despite there being power
adjustable pedals that can give three extra inches of pedal length that are now
frequently installed in modern cars, some still decide to move their seat
forward and sit past the 10-inch distance. Car manufacturers should remove the
ability to do this completely, only allowing for movement from the 10-inch mark
and further. Although this may not be what causes a majority of the deaths in
accidents, it is by no means an insignificant amount.

Another way to reduce the traffic fatality rate comes from effective land-use
planning. By decreasing the distance one has to travel and making the area more
compact, it actually decreases the accident fatality. This is because the speed
at which people travel in these more condensed areas is much slower when
compared to in a more open, less compact urban area. Additionally, things like
increasing street connectivity and decreasing the number of higher speed roads
in residential areas are able to make fatality rates drop by 1.5% for every 1%
change that a city makes in these areas [25].

**5 Appendix**

**5.1 Supplementary Information**

**Table 5.11:** Calculated Fatality Costs per Person (Mean and SD)

| **STATE**      | Total Automobile Fatality Costs | Total Fatalities | Average Automobile Fatality Costs per Person |
|----------------|---------------------------------|------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Alabama        | \$1,530,000,000                 | 953              | \$1,605,456.45                               |
| Alaska         | \$72,000,000                    | 80               | \$900,000.00                                 |
| Arizona        | \$1,370,000,000                 | 1,010            | \$1,356,435.64                               |
| Arkansas       | \$820,000,000                   | 516              | \$1,589,147.29                               |
| California     | \$5,830,000,000                 | 3,563            | \$1,636,261.58                               |
| Colorado       | \$943,000,000                   | 632              | \$1,492,088.61                               |
| Connecticut    | \$434,000,000                   | 294              | \$1,476,190.48                               |
| Delaware       | \$181,000,000                   | 111              | \$1,630,630.63                               |
| Florida        | \$4,400,000,000                 | 3,133            | \$1,404,404.72                               |
| Georgia        | \$2,100,000,000                 | 1,504            | \$1,396,276.60                               |
| Hawaii         | \$164,000,000                   | 117              | \$1,401,709.40                               |
| Idaho          | \$351,000,000                   | 231              | \$1,519,480.52                               |
| Illinois       | \$1,700,000,000                 | 1,031            | \$1,648,884.58                               |
| Indiana        | \$1,220,000,000                 | 858              | \$1,421,911.42                               |
| Iowa           | \$463,000,000                   | 318              | \$1,455,974.84                               |
| Kansas         | \$571,000,000                   | 404              | \$1,413,366.34                               |
| Kentucky       | \$1,060,000,000                 | 724              | \$1,464,088.40                               |
| Louisiana      | \$1,250,000,000                 | 768              | \$1,627,604.17                               |
| Maine          | \$198,000,000                   | 137              | \$1,445,255.47                               |
| Maryland       | \$758,000,000                   | 501              | \$1,512,974.05                               |
| Massachusetts  | \$522,000,000                   | 360              | \$1,450,000.00                               |
| Michigan       | \$1,360,000,000                 | 974              | \$1,396,303.90                               |
| Minnesota      | \$627,000,000                   | 381              | \$1,645,669.29                               |
| Mississippi    | \$1,000,000,000                 | 664              | \$1,506,024.10                               |
| Missouri       | \$1,310,000,000                 | 921              | \$1,422,366.99                               |
| Montana        | \$262,000,000                   | 182              | \$1,439,560.44                               |
| Nebraska       | \$349,000,000                   | 230              | \$1,517,391.30                               |
| Nevada         | \$498,200,000                   | 330              | \$1,509,696.97                               |
| New Hampshire  | \$202,000,000                   | 147              | \$1,374,149.66                               |
| New Jersey     | \$798,000,000                   | 564              | \$1,414,893.62                               |
| New Mexico     | \$573,500,000                   | 391              | \$1,466,751.92                               |
| New York       | \$1,440,000,000                 | 943              | \$1,527,041.36                               |
| North Carolina | \$2,260,000,000                 | 1,437            | \$1,572,720.95                               |
| North Dakota   | \$152,000,000                   | 105              | \$1,447,619.05                               |
| Ohio           | \$1,690,000,000                 | 1,068            | \$1,582,397.00                               |
| Oklahoma       | \$970,000,000                   | 655              | \$1,480,916.03                               |
| Oregon         | \$640,000,000                   | 506              | \$1,264,822.13                               |
| Pennsylvania   | \$1,790,000,000                 | 1,190            | \$1,504,201.68                               |
| Rhode Island   | \$91,000,000                    | 59               | \$1,542,372.88                               |
| South Carolina | \$1,560,000,000                 | 1,037            | \$1,504,339.44                               |
| South Dakota   | \$205,000,000                   | 130              | \$1,576,923.08                               |
| Tennessee      | \$1,540,000,000                 | 1,041            | \$1,479,346.78                               |
| Texas          | \$5,700,000,000                 | 3,642            | \$1,565,074.14                               |
| Utah           | \$336,000,000                   | 260              | \$1,292,307.69                               |
| Vermont        | \$99,300,000                    | 68               | \$1,460,294.12                               |
| Virginia       | \$1,310,000,000                 | 820              | \$1,597,560.98                               |
| Washington     | \$930,000,000                   | 546              | \$1,703,296.70                               |
| West Virginia  | \$417,300,000                   | 294              | \$1,419,387.76                               |
| Wisconsin      | \$828,000,000                   | 588              | \$1,408,163.27                               |
| Wyoming        | \$129,000,000                   | 111              | \$1,162,162.16                               |
| Total          | \$55,004,300,000                | 36,529           | \$1,505,770.76                               |
| Mean           | \$1,472,638                     |                  |                                              |
| Stand Dev      | \$131,448                       |                  |                                              |

This data was synthesized from the sources [26] and [27].

**5.2 Technical Computing**

All of the modeling was executed using the Java Development Environment. Our
code can be accessed in this Github link:
<https://github.com/Jaystarter12/MTFC-Team-Miscalculation-Accident-Simulation/blob/main/Fatal%20Accident%20Simulation>

**5.3 References**

[1] Media, NHTSA. “2019 Fatality Data Show Continued Annual Decline in Traffic
Deaths.” NHTSA, NHTSA, 8 Jan. 2021,
[www.nhtsa.gov/press-releases/2019-fatality-data-traffic-deaths-2020-q2-projections](http://www.nhtsa.gov/press-releases/2019-fatality-data-traffic-deaths-2020-q2-projections)

[2] “Vision, Strategies, Action: Guidelines for an Effective Vision Zero Action
Plan.” Vision Zero Network,
[www.visionzeronetwork.org/project/roadmapforaction/](http://www.walthew.com/top-causes-of-car-crashes-in-seattle/).

[3] “Top Causes of Car Crashes in Seattle.” The Walthew Law Firm, 13 Nov. 2018,
[www.walthew.com/top-causes-of-car-crashes-in-seattle/](http://www.walthew.com/top-causes-of-car-crashes-in-seattle/).

[4] Baruchman, Michelle. “Seattle Traffic Deaths and Injuries down Slightly Last
Year; Most of the Fatalities Were Pedestrians.” The Seattle Times, The Seattle
Times Company, 12 Mar. 2019,
[www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/transportation/seattle-traffic-deaths-and-injuries-down-slightly-last-year-most-of-the-fatalities-were-pedestrians/](http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/transportation/seattle-traffic-deaths-and-injuries-down-slightly-last-year-most-of-the-fatalities-were-pedestrians/).

[5] “Fatalities from Crashes.” Fatalities from Crashes \| Vital Signs,
[www.vitalsigns.mtc.ca.gov/fatalities-crashes](http://www.vitalsigns.mtc.ca.gov/fatalities-crashes).

[6] “Number of U.S. Aircraft, Vehicles, Vessels, and Other Conveyances.” Number
of U.S. Aircraft, Vehicles, Vessels, and Other Conveyances \| Bureau of
Transportation Statistics,
[www.bts.gov/content/number-us-aircraft-vehicles-vessels-and-other-conveyances](http://www.bts.gov/content/number-us-aircraft-vehicles-vessels-and-other-conveyances).

[7] 16, Author: Anthony JohnsonDate: June, and Author: Anthony Johnson. “Bus
Accident Statistics.” Advocates Injury Attorneys, 18 Aug. 2020,
[www.advocateslaw.com/advocates-knowledge-base/bus/bus-accident-statistics/\#automobile-vs--bus-accident-statistics](http://www.advocateslaw.com/advocates-knowledge-base/bus/bus-accident-statistics/#automobile-vs--bus-accident-statistics).

[8] “How Public Transit Impacts Accidents.” FVF, 26 Sept. 2019,
[www.fvflawfirm.com/public-transit-impacts-accidents](http://www.fvflawfirm.com/public-transit-impacts-accidents).

[9] “Public Transportation: Diesel Technology Forum.”
Https://Www.dieselforum.org,
[www.dieselforum.org/about-clean-diesel/public-transportation](http://www.dieselforum.org/about-clean-diesel/public-transportation).

[10] Aber, Judah. “Electric Bus Analysis for New York City Transit.” Columbia
University, May 2016,
[www.columbia.edu/\~ja3041/Electric%20Bus%20Analysis%20for%20NYC%20Transit%20by%20J%20Aber%20Columbia%20University%20-%20May%202016.pdf](http://www.columbia.edu/~ja3041/Electric%20Bus%20Analysis%20for%20NYC%20Transit%20by%20J%20Aber%20Columbia%20University%20-%20May%202016.pdf).

[11] “How Often Are People Filing Insurance Claims And For How Much?”
CoverHound,
[www.coverhound.com/insurance-learning-center/how-often-are-people-filing-insurance-claims-and-for-how-much](http://www.coverhound.com/insurance-learning-center/how-often-are-people-filing-insurance-claims-and-for-how-much).

[12] ValuePenguin.com. Auto Insurance Rates Decreasing in 2021 for the First
Time in a Decade, ValuePenguin.com, 7 Jan. 2021,
[www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/auto-insurance-rates-decreasing-in-2021-for-the-first-time-in-a-decade-301202863.html](http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/auto-insurance-rates-decreasing-in-2021-for-the-first-time-in-a-decade-301202863.html).

[13] Andrew, Scottie. “Risky Driving and Fatal Crashes Surged in 2020, Even with
Fewer Drivers on the Road, a New Report Finds.” *CNN*, Cable News Network, 19
Jan. 2021,
[www.cnn.com/2021/01/19/us/risky-driving-pandemic-wellness-trnd/index.html](http://www.cnn.com/2021/01/19/us/risky-driving-pandemic-wellness-trnd/index.html).

[14] Admin, et al. “What Is the Average Cost of a Car Accident?” The Intelligent
Driver, 14 Sept. 2020,
[www.theintelligentdriver.com/2020/08/26/what-is-the-average-cost-of-a-car-accident/](http://www.theintelligentdriver.com/2020/08/26/what-is-the-average-cost-of-a-car-accident/).

[15] “San Francisco Municipal Railway.” *San Francisco Municipal Railway - CPTDB
Wiki*,
[www.cptdb.ca/wiki/index.php/San_Francisco_Municipal_Railway](http://www.cptdb.ca/wiki/index.php/San_Francisco_Municipal_Railway).

[16] “Sound Transit.” *Sound Transit - CPTDB Wiki*,
[www.cptdb.ca/wiki/index.php/Sound_Transit](http://www.cptdb.ca/wiki/index.php/Sound_Transit).

[17] “King County Metro.” *King County Metro - CPTDB Wiki*,
[www.cptdb.ca/wiki/index.php/King_County_Metro](http://www.cptdb.ca/wiki/index.php/King_County_Metro).

[18] Widmer, Bill. “50+ Car Accident Statistics (Aug. 2020) // Auto Accident
Deaths.” *The Wandering RV*, The Wandering RV, 1 Oct. 2020,
[www.thewanderingrv.com/car-accident-statistics/](http://www.thewanderingrv.com/car-accident-statistics/).

[19] MacKechnie, Christopher. “How Much Does It Cost to Purchase and Operate a
Bus?” *LiveAbout*, 31 Jan. 2019,
[www.liveabout.com/bus-cost-to-purchase-and-operate-2798845](http://www.liveabout.com/bus-cost-to-purchase-and-operate-2798845).

[20] “Is Your Auto Insurance Going Up? Here's How to Lower Your Bill.” *U.S.
News & World Report*, U.S. News & World Report,
[money.usnews.com/money/personal-finance/saving-and-budgeting/articles/is-your-auto-insurance-going-up-heres-how-to-lower-your-bill](http://money.usnews.com/money/personal-finance/saving-and-budgeting/articles/is-your-auto-insurance-going-up-heres-how-to-lower-your-bill).

[21] “Facts + Statistics: Auto Insurance.” *III*,
[www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-auto-insurance\#Premiums](http://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-auto-insurance#Premiums).

[23] “U Drive. U Text. U Pay.” *NHTSA*, 12 Jan. 2021,
[www.nhtsa.gov/risky-driving/distracted-driving](http://www.nhtsa.gov/risky-driving/distracted-driving).

[24] Biren Law Group. “Don't Sit Too Close to the Steering Wheel.” *Biren Law
Group*, 29 Aug. 2019,
[www.biren.com/blog/2015/september/the-dangers-of-sitting-too-close-to-the-steering/](http://www.biren.com/blog/2015/september/the-dangers-of-sitting-too-close-to-the-steering/).

[25] Luke, Nikita. “8 Ways to Reduce Road Fatalities Using the 'Safe System'
Approach: .” *TheCityFix*, 15 Oct. 2019,
[www.thecityfix.com/blog/8-ways-to-reduce-road-fatalities-using-the-safe-system-approach-nikita-luke-anna-bray-sharpin/](http://www.thecityfix.com/blog/8-ways-to-reduce-road-fatalities-using-the-safe-system-approach-nikita-luke-anna-bray-sharpin/).

[26] “State-Specific Costs of Motor Vehicle Crash Deaths.” *Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention*, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 5 Nov.
2020,
[www.cdc.gov/transportationsafety/statecosts/index.html](http://www.cdc.gov/transportationsafety/statecosts/index.html).

[27] “Motor-Vehicle Deaths by State.” *Injury Facts*, 23 Mar. 2020,
[www.injuryfacts.nsc.org/state-data/motor-vehicle-deaths-by-state/](http://www.injuryfacts.nsc.org/state-data/motor-vehicle-deaths-by-state/).
